[Models] Activation checkpointing from TrorchTune (#2954)
huggingface/trl: docs/source/reducing_memory_usage.md

</hfoption>
</hfoptions>

## Activation offloading

Activation offloading is a memory efficiency technique that reduces GPU VRAM usage by temporarily moving activation tensors to CPU RAM during the forward pass and bringing them back only when needed for the backward pass. This significantly reduces peak memory usage at the cost of slightly increased training time.

To enable activation offloading in your SFT training configuration:

> </hfoption>

Reviewer: Out of curiosity, what do these tags do?

Author: it shows alternatives for different trainers: https://github.com/huggingface/doc-builder?tab=readme-ov-file#options

<hfoption id="SFT">

```python
from trl import SFTConfig

training_args = SFTConfig(..., activation_offloading=True)
```

</hfoption>
</hfoptions>

<Tip warning={true}>

> When using activation offloading with pre-initialized models that use Liger kernels, you must disable Liger cross entropy due to compatibility issues. The issue occurs specifically with `use_liger_kernel=True` because Liger cross entropy performs in-place operations which conflict with activation offloading. The default setting (`use_liger_kernel=False`) may work properly.

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
When using activation offloading with models that use Liger kernels, you must disable Liger cross entropy due to compatibility issues. The issue occurs specifically with `use_liger_kernel=True` because Liger cross entropy performs in-place operations which conflict with activation offloading. The default setting (`use_liger_kernel=False`) works:
```

Perhaps add a cross-link to the Liger part of the docs too?

```python
# When using activation offloading with a model that uses Liger kernels:
from trl import SFTConfig

training_args = SFTConfig(
    activation_offloading=True,
    use_liger_kernel=False,  # Disable Liger cross entropy
    # Other parameters...
)
```
</Tip>

> Under the hood, activation offloading implements PyTorch's `saved_tensors_hooks` to intercept activations during the forward pass. It intelligently manages which tensors to offload based on size and context, avoiding offloading output tensors which would be inefficient. For performance optimization, it can optionally use CUDA streams to overlap computation with CPU-GPU transfers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Under the hood, activation offloading implements PyTorch's [`saved_tensors_hooks`](https://pytorch.org/tutorials/intermediate/autograd_saved_tensors_hooks_tutorial.html#hooks-for-autograd-saved-tensors) to intercept activations during the forward pass. It intelligently manages which tensors to offload based on size and context, avoiding offloading output tensors which would be inefficient. For performance optimization, it can optionally use CUDA streams to overlap computation with CPU-GPU transfers.
```
